And leave
some time for questions. I'm sure the committee will have plenty of questions,
so fire away.
Good morning, and thanks very much for the opportunity to present.
My intent is to talk about sections of the bill that are of key interest to New
Zealand's rock lobster sector in less than 10 minutes and leave the remaining time
for your questions.
Our submission provides more detail on the bill proposals, what we think they'll
achieve, and addresses concerns or issues that have been raised, sets
out improvements and amendments we suggest are needed.
Overall, some components of the bill make really important enhancements to the
Fisheries Act by improving the tools available to manage fisheries, making better
use of information, recognizing the industry's role in management, and
enabling more targeted and cost-effective approach.
The proposals achieve these outcomes while maintaining sustainability
standards, providing for consultation with all sectors,
and without undermining the QMS.
The additional mechanisms we think enable a more responsive and timely
management and increase the number of stocks that can be reviewed annually.
Because the provisions also enable careful planning around future decisions, they
support investment in research and monitoring because of the clear links between
science and evidence and management decisions.
Those improvements increase the certainty around how stocks are managed.
There's been considerable comment on the bill, obviously, with views expressed
about what stakeholders want from management.
We believe that examination of the proposal shows that they will deliver on many
of these issues. For example, they maintain and build on the current
protections and safeguards in the Act to ensure sustainability of
harvest and address adverse effects.
In fact, we think they're likely to improve overall environmental
sustainability performance through increasing the capacity of the system to make
timely changes to sustainability settings and enabling a more
targeted approach to addressing those issues.
Now I'll talk briefly about the proposals in the bill that are most
important, we think, to improve the management of rock lobster fisheries for
all sectors. First up for us is management procedures.
They're a key tool in modern fisheries management, clearly regarded
as international best practice. They recognize and provide for the
use of-- or recognizing MPs would encourage their use
and substantially reduce the time and effort needed to put in place
responsive management changes, either decreases where they're necessary or
increases. For rock lobster stocks, what that means is that
we could review the TAC for most or all rock lobster stocks on an
annual basis instead of the current circumstances where normally only two
stocks get reviewed each year.
MPs put in place arrangements for the period following a very
comprehensive evaluation against targets and limits and stock
characteristics supported by full consultation.
They support maintaining stocks at management targets, and they
outline the information that will be used to inform decisions.
They're not a set and forget arrangement.
The breakout rules mean they can be put in place,
and those rules specify upfront how they and when they should be
revoked if the procedure is not achieving the
objectives. They have been used since the mid-1990s
for rock lobster fisheries and have, on the record, you can see they've
supported considerable rebuild of stocks, 400% increase in
abundance overall since that time, and maintenance of stocks generally
at management targets. Notwithstanding, there are management issues
that we need to address.
The second area we want to emphasize the importance of is
recognizing the non-regulatory measures in TAC decisions.
Enabling recognition of these measures is an important step
forward to support more responsive management and tools that can benefit
fisheries for all sectors, such as shelving, spatial management, and
area-based catch limits. The rock lobster industry has quite a long
record of implementing these sorts of measures.
Currently, there is legal doubt about whether the decision-maker can
consider or take into account these measures, leading to
uncertainty and an inconsistent approach.
In recent years for rock lobster, it's clear that we need to
manage at a scale less than the QMA to usefully recognize
the performance of parts of a stock within a QMA.
Non-regulatory measures are likely to play an increasingly important
role, and they do things that the ministry does not have
the tools or the flexibility to do that industry can do on
a relatively short-term basis.
There are, however, set out in our submission a number of issues we have with the
current drafting, and we put forward some suggestions for your
consideration. The third area is TAC
setting under high, medium, low information provisions.
We think that categorization better recognizes the different levels of
information available on stocks and will enable more regular
revision of TACs to address sustainability risks and provide for
use. This is particularly an issue for medium and low
information stocks, where the effect of the current provisions is
that it's very difficult to review those stocks, and the outcome is they
remain unchanged for long periods, even decades.
Clearly, that's not good fisheries management, and this is one mechanism that will
kind of unlock that a bit.
Clarifying the role of the TAC, fourth area we think is useful.
We do support the idea that the TAC is primarily directed at
managing stock abundance at a quite a management area level rather than
addressing sub-QMA management issues or adverse effects of fishing.
TAC is not very effective or appropriate
to address those sorts of issues.
The way that it's set up in the bill, the decisions need to take into account the
effect on other stocks, the interaction between stocks, and the
environmental conditions affecting the stock.
We think they are the right considerations to influence
the setting of a TAC along with the underpinning
science.For other issues within the Q&A, other
more direct mechanisms will be more effective, targeted, and more transparent,
impose lower costs overall.
Another area we support is the considerations for
TAC decisions for Section 13 stocks.
The bill sets out this new comprehensive list of standard factors that
must be had regard to for Section 13 TAC decisions.
We think these provide useful consolidated guidance for decision-makers,
but we suggest that biological characteristics of the stock
should be added to the list of standard factors, and that we
should retain
the take into account consideration for fisheries plans that's lost
through the amendment of 112A.
We also support the multi-year TAC decisions
because the provisions provide for establishing arrangements that create
certainty for stakeholders. They set in place like an MP at sort of a
low level MP, set in place a regime that can
manage a stock for successive years after
carefully considering its circumstances.
It allows other stocks to be reviewed and increases the capacity of a system.
It allows for adjustments where there is
insufficient information to support a permanent change.
Carry forward. The bill provides for an application for
additional ACE carry forward in exception
circumstances.
Certainly, the rock lobster industry has experienced situation where ACE can't
be taken for an economic return in situations that
are really unrelated to stock sustainability.
This can cause enormous economic stress and costs on fishing businesses
and families.
A clear example is the closure of the Chinese market in 2020 as a result
of COVID. But other ones include biotoxin outbreaks
to address food safety risks, which have no impact on the lobsters, but they just
prevent the ACE being taken. And they're increasingly common
in spatial extent.
We don't believe there are issues with the ACE carry forward.
It doesn't result in more fish being caught.
It simply allows some of the ACE from year one to be taken in
year two.
We do think the criteria in the Act need to be
expanded,
because they don't take into account some relevant
considerations. For example, they wouldn't deal with the
current fuel crisis. If diesel price
extended to an extent where you had to tie up boats, the current criteria in the
Act would not allow for carry forward in those circumstances.
And some other human-induced events.
Our submission sets out more detail on that bill.
So I'm going to stop there. There are, of course, other provisions we're
interested in, but I wanted to leave lots of time for questions.
Thank you very much.
Rachel.
Thank you, Mark. My question is around that ACE carry forward, and you've mentioned
an example. I guess there's two examples that I think are quite relevant if you
could talk the committee through.
One is around what happened with COVID, but also Cyclone Gabrielle.
And I guess the differences in those two scenarios and why ACE carry forward was
useful in one but not the other. So if you could talk us through that, it'd be
really helpful.
Okay. Well, we'll start with Gabrielle.
I remember when I started to get the phone calls and the emails, I think 28, 29
January,
2020,
it-
COVID.
For COVID. So very... What did I say?
Gabrielle.
Sorry. COVID.
I was thinking that doesn't sound like Gabrielle.
Yeah. That's right. Sorry.
So it became
very clear quickly that Chinese market was gonna
close, and it did.
So that's at a fairly important point of the fishing year for rock lobster
because Chinese New Year normally occurs end of January, beginning of February.
So there was a lot of uncaught ACE.
Now, in this case, the government reacted fairly quickly
and using the existing carry forward provisions,
they took rock lobster off the fifth schedule and allowed carry forward to
apply. Did it in the nick of time. In fact, the decision was only
communicated, I think, well into March.
What percentage was it, just quickly?
Sorry?
What percentage was allowed to carry?
10. The current provisions allow up to 10%.
So the lesser of under catch or 10%, whichever is the lesser.
So we do think there are circumstances where larger
amounts should be considered. We've talked about the economic stress
that not being able to take ACE can cause for people who've paid
a significant cost for it and, for example, can't get an economic
return. I mean, the fuel crisis is one of those things.
If diesel price were to go beyond
$4 or $5, clearly a lot of boats would need to tie up.
It's got nothing to do with the sustainability of the fishery, but it
is a kind of a self-mechanism to allow for...
It doesn't involve the government and compensating or assistance.
It just allows those catching rights from year one to be carried forward into year
two.
And Gabrielle, can you just quickly talk about why you didn't do it in Gabrielle?
So Gabrielle's,
we think, quite a different situation and makes
clear why it's important that the provisions and decision-making
around carry forward clearly consider sustainability.
So the way the provisions in the new bill are set up, when an application
is received, it must be supported by 75% of QSOs.
The decision-maker has to consider whether there is any sustainability risk.
So the
issue of carry forward was raised following the 2023 cyclones in
Cray three, but here we have a stock that is at a low
point. Clearly, there are sustainability issues.
We've had three TAC reductions, and industry has shelved
twice in the last two years, and currently we've put in place
spatial management measures to deal with the lower performance in
an area of the stock. So when that discussion came up, there was
no support within the industry to use carry forward
provisions in that circumstance because it was quite clear that although the
weatherExtreme weather events had affected ability to fish.
They had also affected sustainability of the stock.
Mm-hmm.
That area of the coastline north of Gisborne is very prone to
sedimentation and so on, and that sedimentation in the inshore environment
affects lobsters to an extent that we don't know long term.
But very clearly there were sustainability risks, so no proposal
was even advanced. The discussion with the industry agreed that that was not
appropriate. But the bill, as I said, provides a protection in that space, giving
the decision-maker discretion if an application should come
forward to decline it on the basis there are sustainability issues.
Mm-hmm.
Susan.
No, my questions have been answered. So it was about the carry forward.
Thank you very much.
Okay. Steve.
Yeah, mine's in a similar
space. It's around the environmental considerations.
So the catch limit's usually not the most effective or appropriate tool to address
adverse effects on fishing or fine-scale management issues.
But you're notwithstanding that catch limits are an effective tool,
it's just that it's not the only thing that should be being considered.
Yeah, of course. I mean, the fundamental of the QMS is
you have a control on total removals from the fishery-
Yep
... that maintains the stock at its management targets and avoids breaching
any sustainability limits. What we're saying is that if you're
trying to address, deal with a local issue, for example, an adverse effect
caused by a method in a particular location, you can
indirectly try and address that method by culling down the whole
TAC, C, and reducing catch overall.
Yep.
But clearly the more effective mechanism is to introduce measures that
restrict the use of that method in the area where it's causing the risk or the
habitat damage. And what the, I think the provisions in the bill attempt
to do is shift the emphasis on setting the
TAC to address the overall sustainability output
control issue, and direct the decision-makers towards using
more targeted and effective measures for,
localized abundance or fine-scale management effects.
Very so.
Steve.
My sup is,
I mean,
the essence of what that alludes to is that we take a broader ecological
view of the whole fishery,
which is that, um, there's, as you rightly point out, there's interactions across
species and across circumstances in a fishery.
Um,
who is best placed to make that evaluation of overall
ecological health, and therefore assist in determining management
strategies or, uh, T- TAC in the
context of a broader ecological view?
Well, there's clearly the Act sets up the
regulator and the ultimate decision-maker as having the authority in that space
to decide on what measures are necessary to r- reach the Act's
ecosystem considerations.
Yeah.
The Fisheries Act, although 1996, even in retrospect,
still stands the test of time as having relatively good set
of requirements to address environmental considerations
and effect an ecosystem-based approach.
The environmental principles have stood the test of time.
They're quite well formulated. That doesn't mean that there's not room for
improvement or that we don't need more information in some
circumstances to better inform, um, the way we
address those ecosystem effects.
But considering the interaction between, um, species and the environmental
impacts of, um, the stock and the effects of things like climate change,
they are all relevant considerations.
And you can see for, speaking for rock lobster fisheries, over the last
decade and maybe particularly the last five years, we can see a big
shift in management and the way that decisions are made to take those things
into account. Um, so it- it- it's happening.
Can I just sup off, um, Mr. Chair, can I just sup off your, the answer to the first
part of the question, which was around those targeted measures?
'Cause you talked about TAC essentially being a blunt tool.
Mm-hmm.
What are some... Can you give us some examples, um, of what those
targeted measures would be if you're looking at like sub-QMS, for example.
So it's a particular area within the tech- within the area that's-
Okay
... That's, yeah.
Sure.
Yeah.
Uh, and there are a number of examples.
But, uh, so, so if we go back to Cray three-
Yeah
... you know, which is currently a fishery that we're looking at very closely
because it's clearly, it's, it's depleted, and we want to make sure that it
rebuilds, uh, and so on. So part of the considerations
last year was looking again at the stock assessment, and although
it showed there was a, you know, a slight positive trend, it wasn't the sort
of rebuild that was wanted. So we looked at a- another reduction.
We considered shelving, but thought that we supported a reduction overall
as being necessary. So we put forward the proposal for a 30%
reduction. But the problem is, is that the, the, the
biological performance of region one and region two, the north and the south
of Cray three, they're quite different.
They've got different stock characteristics.
That's not something that government has the tools to deal with very easily.
So in discussion with the scientists, what the industry formulated was an ace
spreading arrangement whereby we agreed to essentially shift effort within the
QMA to reduce pressure on the, you know, the least
performing part of the stock. The minister in this case accepted that
as a, a proposal and was part of his decision on Cray three, along with the
TAC reduction. In Cray one, where we've got issues on the east
coast of Northland, Cray one, um, suggested a closure
of, um, the area on the east coast of Northland.
That's now been, um, overtaken by the government's decision to stop
commercial and recreational fishing in the Hauraki Gulf, where again, it was
recognized there are abundance issues.
Cray two put forward an area to severely restrain commercial catch, essentially
have a sub-area catch limit in the Hauraki Gulf.
So within those Cray areas, you basically said, "Here's the piece within
Hauraki Gulf with depletion, so we're going to target that area, not the
overall-"
Correct.
Yeah.
Um, one final question from Susan.
I, I just quickly wanted to talk about the time limit for the judicial review.
You mentioned that you weren't actually that excited about that, that it was
lumping everything in together. So, um, I just, just wondering if you could talk
about your-
General concerns about the time limit and that it might
lead to court action
That's right. We
understand, I guess, the sentiment behind it, but judicial
review is an important part of the process in New Zealand, and we think that
such a short time limit would potentially incentivize people to
lodge legal action, where if they had more time to
consider it, it wouldn't be necessary.
Right.
There is also issues that for all parties, that if you want to look carefully at a
decision within that sort of timeframe, you wouldn't even be able to get all of
the information behind what supported a decision and properly
inform your view.
So in our view, trying to have some sort of time limit is appropriate.
We suggest, as you can see in our submission, a longer one, but that time limit is,
we don't believe it's appropriate.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you.
Time flies when you're having fun.
And I really appreciate your thoughts and
submission.
Yeah.
I think it's-
Yeah. Thanks
... really, really useful for the committee. Thank you for your time.
Yeah. Thanks for the opportunity.
I will say that we did make a number of recommendations
for amendments and adjustments, but there just hasn't been time today, but I'm sure
the committee may have time or-
Yes. Yeah.
We're aware of it
... the officials.
Thank you.
Right. What we'll do,
folks, is have Ngāi Tahu next, but what I would like
to do is seek leave from the committee to change the agenda
because we've got Doug Paulin, CEO of Sealord.
It's been a bit of a muck up.
He's keen to speak to the committee, even if it's for 10 to 15 minutes, so if we
could have him-
Yeah
... afterwards. Is that okay?
Fine. Yeah.
Thank you. Right. If we could bring-
The guys are online.
Are they? Excellent. We can bring them in.
I'm going to have to leave in 20 minutes.
Can the clerks please give us a copy of Sealord's submission?
Yes.
Quite quickly. Thank you.
Yeah.
How many individuals have
it?
Good morning. Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
If you could just introduce yourselves and
then we'll leave it with you. You have 20 minutes.
Be really good if you could leave some time for questions.
You can hear us, can you?
Yes, we can. Kia ora koutou.
All right. It's in your hands.
Kia ora, and
thank you. Just wanted to acknowledge you, Miles, as the chair, and
also thank you to the other panel members.
Appreciate you giving us the time to
talk to the submission.
Just to briefly introduce ourselves.
My name is Aaron Endacott. I'm here representing Ngāi Tahu Seafood.
My colleague beside me is Tania Stevens.
She's here representing Tirunaga o Ngāi Tahu.
And we also have online Rodney Tribe, who I'm
hoping is also able to join as a panelist,
and he's here to assist us to answer any questions the
panel may have. Rodney's been with Ngāi Tahu Seafood for over 30
years, so has extensive experience within the industry.
Yeah, I see he's just jumped on. Thank you for that.
We would also like to acknowledge those who've gone before us,
those who stand with us, those who helped through our settlement
process and our children after us.
This
is a joint submission
by Tirunaga o Ngāi Tahu and Ngāi Tahu Seafood.
Tirunaga o Ngāi Tahu is made up of 18 Papatipu Runanga, and
Ngāi Tahu Seafood is the commercial operation which has been set up to
manage the fisheries assets that came through settlement.
The economic return that we generate goes back to the iwi to
fulfill a number of aspirations the iwi have, including whānau wellbeing,
education, health, et cetera.
Ngāi Tahu generally supports the changes in this bill, as you will see in our
submission.
And our approach to the submission today is to talk through some of the
items and thinking that underpins our
submission,
and then give a bit of a summary, and then allow some time at the end for
questions that the panel may have.
And I'll hand over to Tania to talk through
the Tirunaga o Ngāi Tahu portions.
Well, kia ora koutou. Thanks, Aaron.
So I've listened to some of your previous submissions that
you've received, and I'm really conscious that the committee is
receiving and hearing a range of strong views about both the bill and
commercial fisheries more generally.
So what we want to do is take the opportunity to really anchor the,
no pun intended, the matters raised in our submission as
foundational to your consideration of both the submissions and
the bill.
While you may receive fewer submissions that touch on these points, the matters
raised by Ngāi Tahu, Te Ohu Kaimoana and others
engage really fundamental rights and obligations that shouldn't be
wasted on that basis. So Ngāi Tahu are
seafaring people, and we have a long tradition of exercising
kaitiakitanga alongside mahi kai, so working the kai.
And this is as true now as it was 800 years ago or so.
And that relationship is seamless for us.
So as noted in our submission, fishing is a
right for Māori, and that was acknowledged in Article 2 of the Treaty of
Waitangi. So with the introduction of the Quota Management System,
the QMS, Māori saw those rights being publicly commercialized and
sold. But with the Crown, and following extensive
negotiation, we landed in a place where we could accept the
QMSAnd it cannot be overstated how important the
Fisheries Act is to upholding the fisheries settlement.
And therefore, how important it is that the act can continue
to adapt and move forward. And these considerations
underline our reasons for supporting the bill.
And Aaron will build on this further.
Kia ora, Tania.
As Tania mentioned, our submission is
underpinned by our Article 2
rights, which were confirmed
in settlement. Also our obligation as kaitiaki.
But we are also privileged to be operational within the seafood
industry and the commercial industry.
So we also have
experience within that space which informs some of our
pieces of our submission.
Operations wise, we are operational within rock lobster,
pāua, and a lot of wet fish species, either directly
or through arrangements with commercial partners in the
industry.
Our operations are across mainly Te Waipounamu,
but we do have some footprint in other
areas. Our workforce is
around about 60 staff. That does fluctuate seasonally
depending on
the busy times of the season.
We are privileged through that process to be able to sit
on a lot of advocation groups
and industry management bodies where we can push our views forward,
and we can ensure that our values are pushed into those
forums. We actively take advice from
fishermen and listen to the fishing sector and bring those views forward into
those forums also.
So it gives us an ability to understand how important
the industry-led proactive measures that are put in
place have been beneficial to fisheries,
which is why we're supportive of the non-regulatory measures having
increased weight when decisions are made about the
future.
Our experience in the fishing industry,
although we note there are isolated instances of
poor performance,
generally the vast majority of the engagements we have
are always advocating for sustainable outcomes
and for a sustainable fishery that is here for the
future generations, and that really
is encouraging to us as active members within this space.
Ngāi Tahu and Ngāi Tahu Seafood, as Tania
mentioned, we really believe in the integrity of
the settlement process. We believe in the integrity of the
quota management system. And we are supportive of
the bill's intentions to improve efficiency, to
improve some flexibility in decision making.
And we believe it will enhance
the ability to have sustainable fisheries going into the future.
In summary, our
submission is generally in support of the bill with some caveats in there
which you'll be able to read and ask questions on.
We would also like to highlight that any
changes to the bill and the ability to
administrate those changes needs to be appropriately
resourced by MPI.
Our experience with some fisheries is not
necessarily a process one, but could be a resource one, where the
process was late to be implemented due to resourcing.
And that has impacted a fishery, which is also why we
advocate that the industry or proactive measures from
industry are just as important to managing fisheries
and why we support that extra weight.
And we'll leave it there and just would like to take
some time to allow the panel to ask us some questions on our submission.
Thank you very much. We've got a question from Steve Abel.
Kia ora koutou.
Recognizing your customary rights to the
Moana and Article 2 rights,
acknowledge that absolutely.
How do you
manage the tensions between what we have
observed in terms of certain fishery collapses around
hoki or
orange roughy
and appropriate
long-term protection of the health of those species,
when what is,
I think, not unfairly observed as certain commercial fishing
practices are having a long-term deleterious
effect on those fisheries.
I wonder how
Ngāi Tahu deals with the tensions between the kaitiaki
responsibilities you outlined and the commercial fishing
side of things.
Yeah, I can
answer that. I think
with the orange roughy,
that is probably more of a historical pre-QMS
issue that was,
we believe, helped by the introduction of the QMS system.
But the question around managing tension is a good one because
our feet are often held to the fire by our own whānau and our own
papatipuWhich is why we continually
advocate for sustainable practices.
And any time we are aware of any issues that
are coming into these fisheries, we are always on
those forums advocating our whanau views.
We're not the sole decision-makers in these forums, but
we do believe that having our say at those forums is equally as
important, and we take those views forward and can feed back
that we have submitted those views.
But I understand the question, and it is something we
regularly deal with in terms of
the social license to operate from our own whanau.
I
have a bit of a sup on that. So you talked about the non-regulatory
measures,
and the previous submitter gave us
examples of non-regulatory measures in their
submission that they feel are working well in the rock lobster
industry.
Would you be confident that
non-regulatory measures
would be as successful in other parts of the
seafood industry? Because it would seem,
you look at
some areas in New Zealand, the fisheries are
seriously depleted.
Yes, we believe that they would be.
We've been involved in many instances of advocating
for non-regulatory measures, with some
examples being shelving or catch spreading or
moving certain catch out of certain areas of a
larger fishery.
Those measures have been successful and
we continually advocate and listen to fishers,
some of which are quota owners and are not supportive.
But due to our ability to influence and be operational, we
always support and push those measures that we believe are important.
We would also like to add that
if there is a
shelving,
that that should potentially limit the ability to
roll over that stock, similar to what it would if a
TACC reduction was put in place.
But generally speaking, we believe those actions have
been beneficial to fisheries
in the ones that we're involved in, and think that as a decision-making
tool for industry to make proactive decisions
prior to having to have MPI involved, by
listening to those on the water and those in processing who are
closer to the issues,
that it does make for an effective tool.
And you may also note from our submission that we've specifically
included support for the monitoring provisions
and sought to make that stronger. Because monitoring and ensuring
implementation of the measure is, we consider to be very
important as part of that process.
Thanks for that.
We've got a question from Mark Cameron.
Good morning, everyone, and kia ora.
I'm just interested,
the chair mentioned non-regulatory tools
in the industry, and you've both advocated for the use of that.
There's a natural tension between that and obviously the TAC
rules that are implemented by MPI.
How do you gauge when it is necessary
to get MPI involved?
Are you able to unmute, Rodney?
I'm pretty certain I can.
Yeah, you're good.
Yep, so very good question.
We would actually say that those non-regulatory measures,
part of those are for the minister to take account of those.
And if I use examples down here in the Deep South,
we've had non-regulatory measures in our paua fisheries down here for a
number of years. Paua 5A, paua 5D, even
paua 5B.
Industry would probably say at some stage we would like those to become regulatory
measures.
But at the moment, we use them as non-regulatory.
So the clash between the two,
we look at that and go, industry can actually manage quite well.
What we're saying is the minister should take those into account.
Right? So we're not saying use them opposed to, use them in
conjunction with.
Right. Thank you, Rodney.
Got a question from Suz Redmayne.
Kia ora. Hi.
Just talking about the carryover, which is 7.9 of your
submission, and you mentioned at the end that
Ngāi Tahu are consulted and that this consultation genuinely informs the
decision made. And I just wondered, is that the case now?
And also, I note that sometimes these were...
I know it was used during COVID and quick decisions
were required, and I just wondered if that might hinder the process
whereby quick action is required,
or why you want that provision in there.
I can start that one. So I think as a general proposition,
if carryover is suggested within the Ngāi Tahu takiwā,
we would like to be consulted on that.
And then I think certainly as members of the industry, we
understand the need to be able to act in a prompt manner.
But further to that, maybe Rodney or Aaron, if you wanted to.
Yeah, I think in terms of the stocks in our
area from a Ngāi Tahu Seafood perspective-Being a
quota owner, we would be involved in that decision-making for the
majority of the quota, especially in
rock lobster and paua in our area. But with other
fisheries that we're not so actively involved in,
we would like the opportunity to have Te Runanga o Ngāi Tahu consulted, and don't
believe it would cause a timeframe issue, as we are generally very
responsive.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
There's no further questions, and we've come to time.
So,
I really appreciate your submission, both the oral and written,
and
the committee will take these things into consideration. So thank you very much.
Thank you.
Ka ra.
Right. Moving on. We're going to
bring in Sea-
Yes
... Norwood.
Yeah, that's me.
Oh, very good. Back.
Welcome,
and
thanks for your patience. We've had a bit of a snafu, as you might be
aware. And
thanks for being able to fit in anyway. So the floor is yours.
My
name's
Doug Paulin. I'm the CEO of Sealord Group, and I'm
here just to talk briefly about our submission.
Mostly, I'd like to leave time for questions.
Because the majority of what I say in terms of the things we support in the bill,
Mark's actually talked some of that detail when we did the rock lobster submission,
notwithstanding that I fish in the deep water, because obviously the
Fisheries Act applies across the board.
So very briefly,
we believe that managerial and recognizing of
procedures that currently industry do which are not recognized within the act
are a very positive change. And I'd like to talk about a couple of those in
relation to the question around orange roughy and hoki, which was
asked
briefly of Ngāi Tahu. So when the hoki fishery, when it
dropped substantially, prior to
that, the science said the hoki fishery was in a great position.
And that is because there is a significant lag, normally two years,
between when the science can be analyzed and when it comes through, and
then it's acted upon. What we were seeing on the water by our fishers
was a reduction in the size of marks and
definitely less fish in the water.
And so what the industry did was we took the position
of dropping it ourselves through shelving initiatives.
We also closed some of the spawning areas for a period of time, and we had
rotational closures. Now, all of those things we did as industry were
not able to be recognized by the minister, and we had to wait
until
hoki came on the plenary for the TAC action to be adjusted.
And whilst I say that the industries
still have some fishers who are not part of the group that agrees those measures,
so there were parts of the industry that were still fishing in the spawn boxes
and were still catching their full area.
So by having a real recognition of these procedures in a
way where the minister can take account of them, we believe it would be a real
positive change, as one example.
Currently, there are a couple of bycatch fisheries where there are
issues. Ling seven is, for example.
It won't be looked at by the plenary for a significant period of time.
We're looking at taking some changes as industry to reduce the
catches in that fishery.
How those are similar, the TAC won't be changed until it's
actually part of the plenary. So by having the ability to
make changes which are currently not part of how
the act operates, we think will be very beneficial for stock
management.
In terms of setting TACs across multiple years,
we're very positive in regards to that change, not only around certainty, but what
it means is that every year you have to look at that stock again.
There has to be agreement around what are the things that will require change in
terms of that TAC. But what it means is that stocks currently, which
might only be looked at once every six or seven years,
if you agree, say, a five-year TAC based on what is
happening at the time.
You say various things have to be in place, you have to then go and look at it
every year.
But it doesn't take up the full plenary.
You don't have to go to a full submission.
There's still consultation, obviously.
But it requires the minister to look at it again.
Whereas at the moment, it's sort of one change and then not looked at
again for potentially five or six years for those medium and low stock.
It's where we don't have a lot of information.
So we believe that is an incredibly positive change going
forward.
Other than that, really, I'm happy to take any questions on the submission or
actually anything in the bill, because I believe a lot of those changes
impact us all.
Thank you very much. We've got a question from Rachel.
I've got lots of questions. So I'll start with one, and then I'll see if I can get
another one in. But
you talked about
the information, I guess, in order to make decisions.
And one of the things I'm a bit obsessed about is have we got good enough data and
information to be making good decisions?
On your submission, item 20, where you talked about
pilchards, and there was a year where you, I think it was
last year, when you
had a massive catch.
Yeah.
And I guess, so sure, you had a massive catch, but have you actually got good
information on how much stock is still left within the fishery?
Because that's, I think, the concern is when you're making decisions to
increase catch-Is there good enough
information to support that?
Well, thank you.
And maybe talk about this particular example a bit more in terms of what other
information you've got.
Yeah. So I think in terms of the ability to have all the science that you do and
say a high information stock, I would say there definitely is not that
ability to have that on every stock, just because of the scale and the cost
of doing that science. So if you're in an ideal world, every single stock in New
Zealand would have the same level of science that Hoki has-
Mm
... for instance. And that's not going to be possible.
But there are, and this is recognized worldwide, catch per unit effort,
and acoustic monitoring of the biomass that's in the water whilst you are catching
the fish, is a viable way of recognizing how much
fish is there and how much you are catching of that existing biomass
and be able to make an in-season adjustment that recognizes for some
species, particularly when they are pelagic based
and come in and out of the EEZ or some that have massive
recruitment
events but they happen in singular periods to be able to make those changes
and those tools are available, and are able to be used.
Mm-hmm.
And that said, that doesn't mean the minister obviously has to make those changes
either because at the end of the day you've got to make your application.
All factors have to be considered and then the minister would make the
decision whether it is or isn't appropriate for a change to be made.
Mm-hmm. So on this, can I just ask this up, on this particular
fish stock, have you got information that there's actually an abundance in addition
to what you've caught?
Yes.
Yeah.
So the biomass readings in terms of what we have acoustically in terms of the
amount of fish that came up in the net versus the amount of fish that was in the
water, we get that information as we are catching, which is why we can talk to
full pilchards, how big that is. The issue for us was not
catching that amount, was not catching pilchards because
the amount of fish that was in the water was incredible at the time.
What would cause a massive increase in pilchards?
It could be environmental conditions. It could be just a recruitment event.
Yeah.
So they've just had a massive event where they come together and spawn and just
biologically produce a lot of fish.
So there are a number of species, southern blue whiting is one, for example, that
they come together once every sort of 6 to 10
years but then they have massive recruitment.
Just one more, this is really important.
It's just would you then be wanting a temporary increase-
Yes
... or a permanent increase? If that's-
And we'd just recognize the position you're at at the moment and say that
that cannot stay for another year because in those events for something like
pilchards, there's no guarantee that biomass would be there the following year.
Mm-hmm.
Because they do move a lot.
Suz.
As you no doubt are aware, we've had a huge amount of
interest and feedback from recreational fishers.
Yes.
And including from iwi interests and you guys have sort of got a foot in both
camps.
Yes.
So they're concerned about we're exporting all our fish and we're not leaving
enough here for people here and they're also concerned about the public
scrutiny and the minister being able to increase the catch and I just
wondered what your feedback is on that with as sort of having
a foot in both camps. How do you feel?
I'm happy-
Supportive of the bill.
Well, I'm happy to give you my viewpoint.
It is important to recognize sealord only fishes in the deep water, so we don't
actually cross over into recreational areas-
Oh, true. True
... because we're outside of the 26 mile and 12 mile line.
Nice.
But in saying that, obviously I'm part of the industry.
I've been in it for 15 years. So look, I think the interest of
everyone is to have bountiful fisheries.
Oh.
And one of the things that you'll hear from inshore fishers and from rock
lobster is the need to be able to make fine scale adjustments within
the different QMAs because at the moment it's a very blunt tool of just
reduce the TAC and a lot of times-
Mm
... you'll find people fighting to keep the TAC up because it's not an issue for
the stock in totality.
Mm.
So by having the ability to recognize all those fine scales, you can
make targeted decisions and recognize the issues for recreational
fishers as well, which in some sub areas actually it's difficult to catch
fish. And therefore rather than drop a whole TAC, you say, "Well,
we make some adjustments around that." I think that's an incredibly positive
change coming out of the bill.
Thank you.
Quick, Suz.
Okay, very quickly, I note that you did support the 20
working day timeframe for the review.
So other industry bodies haven't supported that, and essentially the
concern was that it might incentivize legal action
because there wasn't enough time to do anything else.
How-
I think that's a perspective that some have and look, for us, we believe
20 days is enough. If we want to take action, we believe we can analyze the
data and do the stuff to be able to take action within the 20 days.
Look,
it's not a big deal for us. We're not that concerned if it was a longer period of
time, but we just analyze it from our own perspective.
We believe if we were required to ask for a judicial review, we can do it within
the 20 days.
Okay. Thank you so much.
Steve.
Yeah, thank you.
The
sealord settlements are a vital part of the treaty settlements.
Yeah.
Not contesting that. I guess there's a problem
with public perception of the
general honesty of the fishery-
Mm
... of the fishing industry broadly, of which you're a huge part.
Yeah.
One of the obvious examples is in the deep water,
years of denying that you guys even touched the bottom until it was proved
independently-
Mm
... that you were trawling up massive chunks of deep water coral.
Do you therefore recognize the need for there to be a social license for you to
operate, that there has to be greater scrutiny on what's actually happening?
Because the fact is the commercial fishers have not been honest
with the public about the impact they've had ecologically.
Well, I think there's two things. I think one, the fishing industry is dramatically
different to what it was
20 years ago and even as much as 10 years ago.
Particularly in the deep water because there's been a huge amount of consolidation
and a lot of the operators that were around the times that you refer,
they no longer operate. I think the addition of
having observers onto most of the deep water boats so that
we have a significant observer coverage, I think that should give the public
real belief that now there's a lot of transparency.
The technology changes that have occurred in the last 5, really 5
to 8 years have also greatly increased the
transparency. And look, Sealord's on record saying we support
cameras-Obviously we've said, look, we don't want to pay for observers and
cameras because essentially it would be unaffordable for us almost to go fishing.
But I don't have any issue with camera footage on boats,
and for the regulator to be able to see that footage.
Very good. So-
Oh.
Just quickly, you know of the call for an end to bottom
trawling.
Yeah, I do.
What would be the practical implementation of that in the context of your-
It'll close Sealord, essentially, yeah.
So 76-
And how would that be managed in terms of your treaty rights?
No,
I think-
It's not in the bill
... I think it would be in court. That's bottom trawling.
Steve, it's not in the bill.
It's not in the bill.
I know, but we've got Sealord- Mac.
Yeah. But we're talking about the bill.
Mac.
Yeah, hi team, hi Doug. Good to see you, mate.
You got it, Mac.
Yeah, killed it. Just interested in, you mentioned scientific lag.
I'm cognizant of that, and it's really hard to
ameliorate the effects of that, given that, as you said, it could be a
couple of years in fact. I mean, we understand
that deepwater fishery is under a huge pressure, but I'm actually cognizant of the
inshore commercial sector and how
they deal with multiple species, which is
often quite different from the bluewater stuff.
Mm-hmm.
How do you think scientific lag affects them?
And moreover, from non-regulatory tools
that are implemented, do you think from a voluntary point of view, people are
actually doing what they say they're doing?
Well, I think the inshore is a much better example of them using
non-regulatory tools more often.
I think the deepwater has come to it in a much later
timeframe because they had science and they had the ability to
move TACs more frequently than what you've seen in the inshore.
So I think inshore actually have been ahead of the game for a long period of
time of saying that the fishers are seeing an issue, and then making
a change irregardless of what the TAC is and what it
says. So I think actually they've been a very good example.
And you can find it in multiple fisheries in the inshore.
Deepwater's now using a lot more of those things.
So you're finding shelving, you're finding voluntary changes,
notwithstanding the science. So hoki has the most
money spent on it, and yet we took voluntary measures to drop
TACs, shelve fish, and close areas.
Notwithstanding, we've got a lot of science.
Look, thanks very much, Doug. We've come to time.
I think the committee's going to disperse.
Thank you.
But I really appreciate you taking the time to come in and see us and
the submission that you've put in. So thanks very much.
Thank you.
Thanks, Doug.
So where are you going to be?